>_Threat hunting is the practice of proactively searching for cyber threats that are lurking undetected in a network._

### Importance of Threat hunting

Organizations across the world face threats every day! Instead of peacefully sitting in the security operations centers (SOC) for alerts to funnel through a ticketing system, professionals need to actively detect and isolate these advanced attacks before grave damages can occur. This is called **Threat Hunting**.

>[!note]
>Threat hunting is an aggressive approach that is built to unhide threats that are hidden in a network or system, evading more standard security tools.

Standard tools like firewalls, intrusion detection systems, and SIEMS all rely on alerts to stimulate actions. Alerts are not perfect and they can lead analysts into embarking on a **time-consuming** and **resource-draining chase**. These false positives can make any SOC analyst susceptible to alert fatigue—which can lead to stress and burnout.

By contrast, threat hunters utilize an approach that is less reliant on detection technology (SIEM & Firewalls). They focus more on the attacker’s technique rather than the volatile indicators. This aggressive approach pushes away from the traditional dependence on rules or signatures to trigger alerts. Threat hunters also experience far less mental fatigue than SOC analysts.


## What's the Hype?

The rapid surge in cyber-attacks across the world justifies the need for threat hunters every day. As mentioned, in the previous topic, threat hunting provides organizations an upper hand in the cyber warfare currently taking place. Having a threat hunter in your organization will improve the quality of cybersecurity teams in each organization.

SANS, a private U.S. for-profit company founded in 1989 that specializes in information security, cybersecurity training, and selling certificates, created a poster showcasing the “[Top 20 Coolest Careers in Cybersecurity!](https://www.sans.org/cybersecurity-careers/20-coolest-cyber-security-careers/)” Guess which one is the most popular by looking at the chart linked above. That's right, it's Threat Hunting!

According to Lacework, a cloud security platform that collects & analyzes more data than its competitors, “**nearly 90% of organizations agree that threat hunting should be a top security.**” This makes sense given the current state of cybersecurity. Until all—and I mean all—threats are accurately flagged and eliminated by technology, we need humans with the right tools and expertise to eliminate these potential threats.

## How Can I Become a Threat Hunter?

An _interest_ and some _passion_ for cybersecurity can take you far. Many threat hunters participate in industry-wide events, data-sharing arrangements, and conferences with other public and private-sector analysts to stay abreast of cyber threats—especially from advanced persistent threats (APTs). You as an aspiring threat hunter should do the same!

Most organizations are looking for cyber threat hunters to have a solid foundation as cybersecurity analysts. The experience barrier is a huge deterrent for career-switchers but remember, _**threat hunting is a mid to senior-level role** within cybersecurity._ These professionals often rise through the ranks of junior roles to fill these positions. One example of a junior role is a **SOC Analyst**. A junior SOC analyst is one of the _primary entry-level roles within cybersecurity_. Professionals in these roles are responsible for monitoring, investigating, and reporting incidents from security information and events management (SIEM) systems. They also monitor firewall, web, email, and DNS logs to identify and mitigate intrusion attempts. With this background, professionals are quickly able to work through the cyber threat hunting process and large amounts of data to identify real threats and quickly eliminate them.

## What Education Does a Threat Hunter Need?

If you made it this far, you are probably interested in learning about the educational pathway for becoming a threat hunter. Formal education via **Universities** (Computer Science), programming, or information security (experience/training) can provide a strong foundation for the threat hunter role. Given the skill shortage within cybersecurity, some employers have lowered how strict the current requirements are for cybersecurity positions—the infamous laundry list. This act is making hiring decisions more stable and helps place more focus on technical aptitude, soft skills, and on-the-job experience.

**Certifications**—especially with training—are another avenue for students to verify their skills, learn cyber tools, and increase their employability within the market. Albeit, experience will always trump certifications, this is a great way to learn more about the field without being employed per se. Employers place a heavy weight on the ability of candidates who demonstrate hands-on experience through **gamified cyber platforms** (_HTB, THM, BTLO_). These online resources can supplement your formal training after coming from a university or assist you in your career change from a non-IT-related background.

**Summary**

Cybersecurity talent gaps exist across the country. Closing these gaps requires detailed knowledge of the cybersecurity workforce in your region. This [interactive heat map](https://www.cyberseek.org/heatmap.html) from CyberSeek provides a granular snapshot of demand and supply data for cybersecurity jobs at the state and metro area levels (**USA**) and can be used to grasp the challenges and opportunities facing your local cybersecurity workforce.


## How Much Can a Threat Hunter Earn?

The salaries for threat hunters align pretty close to those of information security analysts with a range from $100,000 to $165,000. With threat hunting falling within the information security analyst side of cybersecurity, the [Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)](https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes151212.htm) is a great website to view the average salary. According to [Talent.com](https://www.talent.com/salary?job=cyber+threat+hunter), a salary & company information site, “the average cyber threat hunter salary in the USA is **$140,000 per year or $67.31 per hour**. Entry-level positions start at **$118,500 per year** while most experienced workers make up to **$202,500 per year**.” Disclaimer, this data was based on 270 salaries.

**High Paying Areas and Sectors**

Threat-hunting salaries can range widely based on industries and location. Here are the top 5 industries and locations according to _BLS_, _INFOSEC_, and _Talent_.

_**Locations:**_

1. _Mississippi_
2. _Virginia_
3. _Georgia_
4. _Texas_
5. _Florida_

_**Industries:**_

1. _Finance and insurance_
2. _Computer systems design and related services_
3. _Management of companies and enterprises_
4. _Management and technical consulting services_
5. _Scientific Research and Development Services_


## Threat Hunter Certifications

For a popular career like Threat Hunting, there are few widely available threat hunter certifications. Now, there are some complemented certs and programs that can closely match the related skills. Let us look into some cybersecurity certifications.

We can’t talk about certifications without bringing up the [Paul Jeremy Security Certification Roadmap](https://pauljerimy.com/security-certification-roadmap/). This is a periodically updated chart filled with the most popular certifications in the market. **On the X axis**, _certifications are ranked by their domain_ (e.g., Forensic, Incident Handling, Penetration Testing). **On the Y axis**, _certifications are ranked by their difficulty_ ranging from beginner (easy) to expert (hard). I suggest you spend time browsing the page and getting familiar with the certifications on the chart!

**Certification List**

Let's talk about some certifications that can help complement your Threat Hunting career! Disclaimer, the certifications/training below are not **FREE** like this course so think of this as supplemental information.

- [CompTIA A+](https://www.comptia.org/certifications/a) - If you have not touched a computer in your life before or worked a traditional IT job (IT Support or Helpdesk), look into this entry-level certification by CompTIA. This two-part exam will measure your competency when it comes to hardware, operating systems, software troubleshooting, and real-world troubleshooting.
    - **Training:** [CertMaster](https://www.comptia.org/training/certmaster-learn/a), [Professor Messer](https://www.professormesser.com/free-a-plus-training/220-1001/220-1000-training-course/), [Jason Dion](https://www.diontraining.com/courses/comptia-a-core-1)

- [CompTIA N+](https://www.comptia.org/certifications/network) - Networking is extremely important when it comes to cybersecurity. This is a great foundation course to learn basic networking concepts including network services, routing technologies, and networking devices. If you are looking for something more advance check out the CCNA (Cisco Certified Network Associate).
    - **Training:** [CertMaster](https://www.comptia.org/training/certmaster-learn/network), [Professor Messer](https://www.professormesser.com/get-network-plus-certified/), [Jason Dion](https://www.diontraining.com/courses/comptia-network)

- [eCTHPv2](https://elearnsecurity.com/product/ecthpv2-certification/) - This is an expert-level certification by eLearnSecurity that tests students’ ability to threat hunt.
    - **Training:** [INE](https://my.ine.com/path/57ec9bc2-be17-4f51-91b9-7ed250be8596?_gl=1%2a1otnddn%2a_gcl_au%2aMjAxMTY0NzQzNy4xNjg3Mjg0NDMw)

- [GIAC GCFA](https://www.sans.org/cyber-security-courses/advanced-incident-response-threat-hunting-training/) - This is SANS’ own threat-hunting certification. It looks like it is paired up with advanced incident response lessons as well. This is the most expensive certification on this list so make sure you are having your employer pay for it if possible. Training is necessary to pass GIAC exams so buying the cert alone is not wise.
    - **Training:** [SANS](https://www.sans.org/cyber-security-courses/advanced-incident-response-threat-hunting-training/)

**Program List**

Finally, let's look at some programs that can help complement your Threat Hunting career! Disclaimer, the programs below are not **FREE** like this course so think of this as supplemental information.

- [Practical Threat Hunting Training by Chris Sanders](https://chrissanders.org/training/threat-hunting-training/) - This is a foundational course from him that will teach you how to approach threat hunting using a proven, structured repeatable framework.

- [Cybersecurity Threat Hunting for SOC Analysts by Vonnie Hudson](https://www.udemy.com/course/cybersecurity-threat-hunting-for-soc-analysts/?src=sac&kw=Threat+hunt) - This is a blue teaming course on Udemy that will help students find covert threats in enterprise networks.

- [Cyber Threat Hunting Training Boot Camp by INFOSEC](https://www.infosecinstitute.com/courses/cyber-threat-hunting/?utm_source=resources&utm_medium=infosec%20network&utm_campaign=course%20pricing&utm_content=hyperlink) - This is a 3-day BootCamp that will prepare you for the Certified Cyber Threat Hunting Professional (CCTHP) exam.


## Introduction to Related Careers:

Threat hunting requires one to be constantly attuned to industry trends—which they use to track and identify advanced cybersecurity threats before their systems are targeted. Threat hunters can also work with other cybersecurity professionals to further the security posture of the company. Threat hunters utilize many of the same skills as cybersecurity analysts. In some contexts, threat hunters can also be referred to as information security analysts. Please note that job titles and job descriptions can vary dramatically depending on the hiring organization. A threat hunter is a mid to senior-level cybersecurity position that can, after several years, make professionals eligible for more senior roles:

### *Network Architect*

They design and implement complex computer networks for organizations in various industries. They also sync up with IT professionals to optimize networks for scalability, security, and performance in support of the organization’s current and future needs.

### *Computer and Information Systems Manager*

They analyze their organization’s computer needs and recommend possible upgrades for top executives to consider. They also plan and direct the maintenance of computer software and hardware.

### *Computer Systems Analyst*

These analysts help the organization operate more efficiently by studying an organization’s current computer systems and procedures and designing improvements to them.

### *Network and Computer System Administrator*

These professionals install, configure, and maintain organizations’ local area networks (LANs), wide area networks (WANs) data communication networks, operating systems, and servers.

### *Senior Security Analyst*

Senior Analysts will perform incident response and security investigations which will contain tasks similar to Threat Hunters. They will locate, investigate, and remove malicious artifacts from compromised systems, as well as respond to suspicious network activity that is more complex.

### *Chief Information Security Officer*

These professionals work alongside company officers, business managers, cyber security teams, and IT managers to effectively monitor and maintain the security of their organization’s applications, databases, computers, and websites.

### *Incident Responder*

Incident Responders are responsible for reacting to security incidents such as data breaches or system compromises. They will search systems for any evidence left behind by malicious actors, such as backdoors, files, new user accounts, and more.


## Building a Career in Threat Hunting

Focus on developing your skills and knowledge so you can build a career in threat hunting (with enough work, anything is possible!). You’ll need to develop both blue-team and red-team skills in order to understand how to defend systems, how to identify unusual or malicious network traffic, and also how attackers would think to try and outsmart them and uncover their presence.

## **Developing Blue-Team Skills**

Let’s start off with some non-shameful self-promotion. If you’re looking to develop general blue-team skills, then our “Introduction to” courses are a free way to develop skills and gain knowledge surrounding defensive security topics. Courses that would be of value to a Threat Hunter include:

- [**Introduction to Network Analysis**](https://securityblue.team/courses/network-analysis-training-beginner/) **– FREE** (Because you need to know networking basics, how to use tools like Wireshark to capture live traffic or read PCAPs, and how to identify unusual and suspicious network activity)
- [**Introduction to Digital Forensics**](https://securityblue.team/courses/an-introduction-to-digital-forensics/) – **FREE** (Knowing how to navigate the Linux file system using the command-line interface is a very fundamental skill, and this course also teaches analysis and evidence documentation techniques)

If you really want to boost your career and **learn advanced practical skills**, consider taking our [**Blue Team Level 1 certification**](https://securityblue.team/why-btl1/), which has 5 different domains and 300 lessons, videos, tests, and 18 practical labs. The most useful domains from this course would be SIEM, Incident Response, and Threat Intelligence.

Don't forget to check out our gamified blue team platform, Blue Team Labs Online. This has lots of free content, plus 70+ labs across different blue team disciplines, and has varying difficulty levels. While this is not a training website and relies on a player's existing skills and knowledge, some of our top players don't even work in security! This shows that Google and some research can go a long way.

## **Developing Red-Team Skills**

As mentioned above, Threat Hunting is a mix of both defensive and offensive cyber roles. A great way to learn red-team skills such as penetration testing and vulnerability assessment would be to sign up for a free platform, such as [**Hack The Box**](https://www.hackthebox.eu/). This site allows you to connect to a virtual network where you are able to attack virtual systems, increasing your ability and knowledge around a number of red-team principles. Creating a blog where you post your write-ups (once systems have been retired, as to not breach HTB’s terms and conditions), is also a huge benefit when applying for jobs or talking in interviews, as it shows dedication and passion for security!  
  
Don’t think you’re ready to start hacking just yet? Take our **FREE** course on [**Vulnerability Management**](https://securityblue.team/courses/an-introduction-to-vulnerability-management/). Although this course is focused on the blue-team side of things, it can easily be applied to scanning systems for vulnerabilities and security flaws with malicious intent. Thank you and enjoy the course!