# Network

It is a digital communication network (interlink) for sharing resources between nodes, which are computing devices using common telecommunication technology.

## Network Interface Controller (NIC)

It is a physical interface card in computers and laptops which has **MAC Address** using which the devices in network communicate.

- Modulation is the process of varying one or more properties of periodic waveform called carrier signal with a modulating signal that typically contains information to be transmitted.
- Amplitude, Frequency and Phase Modulation are well known modulation techniques. FM is Frequency modulation, by changing frequency over a range, we receive various radio channels that are being broadcasted at any given time.
- For Data Transmission, we have different set of cables from history like 10Base5, 10Base2, UTP (Unshielded Twisted Pair), Fiber Cables (Single mode and Multi-mode).

## Client and Server

- #Server is a program or device that provides functionality for other programs or devices called **Client**.
- #Client is a piece of computer hardware or software that accesses a service made available by server.
- #Protocol is a set of rules on which communications happen.
- #Port acts as a communication endpoint. It is a 16 bit unsigned integer whose value ranges from 1 to 65535.
- Port is used to send the data to particular application or service running at that endpoint, so that other services running at different cannot get that data nor access them directly.
- HTTP - 80; HTTPS - 443; FTP - 20