
Learn about the key concepts of authentication and authorization and why identity is important in securing corporate resources. You'll also learn about some identity-related services.

## Learning objectives

After completing this module, you'll be able to:

- Understand the difference between authentication and authorization.
- Describe the concept of identity as a security perimeter.
- Describe identity-related services.

# Introduction

Every user, device has an identity that can be used to access resources. Identity is the way in which people and things are identified in corporate network and in cloud. 

So, we have to be absolutely certain of who or what is accessing our data and other resources, coz that's basic security. We wouldn't allow some random stranger to our house at 2AM, do we?

# Authentication and Authorization
## Authentication

- the process of proving that a person is who they say they are.
- Asking Username and Password - if correct, you are authenticated, i.e. you are claiming you are an **AUTHENTIC** user by providing something that only you should know (Password).
## Authorization

- Once, you authenticate a user, we need to know if they can access whatever resource they are requesting or looking for, we don't want our intern accessing Intellectual Property, now, do we?
- That's where authorization comes in. **Authorization** determines the level of access or the permissions an authenticated person has to your data and resources. Authorization is sometimes shortened to AuthZ.

# Identity as the primary security perimeter

